## Background Research Report: The Client's Organization and its Mission and Goals

### Background & General Description – Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve

Located in the state of Louisiana just southwest of New Orleans is the Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve.  The area where the park is located is called the Barataria Preserve and consists of wetlands, swamps, forests and prairie land that cover over 26,000 acres of the southern Mississippi River delta.  The park was first established as a state park in 1966 by the State of Louisiana.  Later, in 1978, the United States Congress designated the park as the Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve.  The area is named after Jean Lafitte, a rather infamous character who resided in and dominated the area in the early 1800s.  The stated mission of the park is to preserve the natural and cultural resources in and around the Mississippi River delta region.

Jean Lafitte operated a rather questionable business in the Barataria region in the early 1800s.  Mr. Lafitte was engaged in smuggling both goods and slaves into the United States through Louisiana when the country had prohibited the importation of African slaves, as well as most goods, from England and France during the Napoleonic wars.  He was considered a pirate by the authorities until 1814, when the War of 1812 came to southern Louisiana.  Mr. Lafitte was then enlisted to help Andrew Jackson turn back the British forces at the Battle of New Orleans, which was fought primarily at the Chalmette Plantation & Battlefield, and is now part of the park.  At this time, Mr. Lafitte and his men all earned pardons for their smuggling activities, and most settled into New Orleans or the Barataria area. The final whereabouts of Mr. Lafitte is a mystery.

The other important population in the Barataria area is today known as the Cajuns.  During the late 1600s, a migration of many settlers from rural western France formed in what is today known as Nova Scotia.  At the time, this was known as Acadie, and the people were the Acadians.  In 1755, the British decided to disperse the Acadians to several locations in and around the Caribbean.  In the early 1800s, as many as 4,000 of these people found their way to the Barataria area.  Over the years their culture, language, and food evolved to what we now refer to as Cajun.

The Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve is tasked to preserve both the natural resources of the Barataria region, as well as the history and culture of those that inhabited the area.  The park has six distinct sites, including the Barataria Preserve, the Chalmette Battlefield, the Acadian Cultural Center, the Prairie Acadian Cultural Center, the Wetlands Acadian Cultural Center, as well as the visitor center in the French Quarter of New Orleans.  For purposes of our study, we will focus on the Barataria Preserve and the natural resources, habitat, and wildlife contained within the preserve.

The Barataria Preserve invites visitors to explore the area via nine different hiking and walking trails.  These vary in length and difficulty to complete, with some being handicapped accessible, and others for more robust hiking.  The trails include the Bayou Coquille  Trail, the Marsh Overlook Trail, the Visitor Center Trail, the Palmetto Trail, the Ring Levee Trail, the Wood Duck Trail, the Plantation Trail, the Old Barataria Trail, and the Twin Canals Trail.  For purposes of this study, data observations were taken over time along four of these different trails.

Inside the Barataria Preserve, the area is teaming with wildlife.  There is a wide array of mammals, reptiles, amphibians, birds, and insects found within the park’s boundaries.  Mammals may include armadillos, squirrels, rabbits, minx, coyote, and white-tail deer.  Tree frogs, green anoles, and water snakes are plentiful, as are American alligators.  After 30 years of protection, the alligator population is healthy and thriving.  Over 200 species of birds call the Barataria Preserve their home, using the vegetation and waterways for foraging, nesting, and resting.  Fish, crabs and other aquatic life are also found on the preserve, as are numerous varieties of insects.

The Barataria Preserve is also home to a wide variety of plant life and foliage.  The Barataria Preserve contains three major plant systems: hardwood forest, swamp, and marsh.  There are over 400 different species of plants found on the preserve.  In the spring, wildflowers are abundant throughout the area, with one of the most stunning being the giant blue iris population.  In summer, the freshwater marsh turns bright green, highlighting systems of reeds, sedges, grasses, and shrubs.  Fall is colorful at the preserve, with brilliant red maples and bright yellow bur-marigolds.  As the preserve covers both wetlands and prairie areas, the vegetation may differ greatly from region to region within the park.

One concern at Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve is the effects of increasing climate change.  Melting polar ice means rising seas everywhere, including along Louisiana's Gulf Coast. Stronger storms flood more coastline and erode more land.  To make it worse, the levees and other flood controls along the Mississippi River and other waterways mean that no new land is being built on the delta. Much of the region's land is from sediment deposited by the river over time.  The natural compression and sinking of the sediment-made land goes on with no new soil washing downstream by seasonal floods. Recent studies have shown that as the land is sinking while the seas are rising, the relative sea levels are rising faster in this area than most places.  Another concern with the changing climate is its effect on the phenology of the region.  In the next section of this document, the description and concerns for the changing phenology will be outlined.

### Infomation Sources:

* Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve. (2019, August 19). Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jean_Lafitte_National_Historical_Park_and_Preserve.

* From Acadian to Cajun. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.nps.gov/jela/learn/historyculture/from-acadian-to-cajun.htm.

* Jean Lafitte: History and Mystery. (2019). Retrieved from https://www.nps.gov/jela/learn/historyculture/upload/Jean-Lafitte-pirate-site-bulletin-for-the-web-Sep-2010.pdf

* Animals. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.nps.gov/jela/learn/nature/animals.htm.

* Plants. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.nps.gov/jela/learn/nature/plants.htm

